Spec: add variant type (#10831)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

> A **`variant`** is a type to represent semi-structured data. A variant value can store a value of any other type, including any primitive, struct, list or map values. The variant value is encoded in its own binary [encoding](variant-spec.md). Variant type is ddded in [v3](#version-3).

Reviewer: ddded -> added. Or we can say Variant type is a part of the v3 spec.

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

### Semi-structured Types

> A **`variant`** is a type to represent semi-structured data. A variant value can store a value of any other type, including `null`, any primitive, struct, list or map value. The variant encoding is defined the [Apache Parquet Project](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantEncoding.md). Variant type is added in [v3](#version-3).

Reviewer 2: The other cases are more specific about what is present, rather than what is being represented. Also, I don't think that the description is accurate. A variant cannot store maps. I would rather state clearly what a variant stores so that there is no ambiguity.

How about this instead?
> A **`variant`** is a binary value that encodes semi-structured data. The structure and data types in a variant are not necessarily consistent across rows in a table or data file. The variant type and binary encoding are defined in the Parquet project. Support for Variant is added in Iceberg v3.
>
> Variants are similar to JSON with a wider set of primitive values including date, timestamp, timestamptz, 
binary, and floating points.
>
> Variant values may contain nested types:
> * An array is an ordered collection of variant values
> * An object is a collection of fields that are a string key and a variant value
>
> Note that the primitive types that can be stored in a variant are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: uuid, time, fixed(L), and nanosecond precision timestamp(tz) are not supported.

Author: I see. We need to define exactly how and what can be stored in a Variant.
 
The variant actually uses two binary values. Should we mention like that rather than a binary value?

> Limitation: map value with only string-type keys is supported in variant.

Reviewer: I'm a bit unclear about this. Are we saying that the variant type only supports map values where all the keys must be string-type, and it doesn't support maps with non-string keys?

> Limitation: map value with only string-type keys is supported in variant.

Author: It's not only for Iceberg. In the spec (https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantEncoding.md), we assume that the keys in an object are string types: `A field_id is an index into the dictionary in the metadata.` .

So we don't support maps with non-string keys.

> Limitation: map value with only string-type keys is supported in variant.

Author: @flyrain  I updated to the following. Can you take a look?

map values must have string-type keys to be stored in a variant; otherwise, they are not supported.

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

#### Semi-structured Types

> A **`variant`** is a value that stores semi-structured data. The structure and data types in a variant are not necessarily consistent across rows in a table or data file. The variant type and binary encoding are defined in the [Parquet project](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantEncoding.md). Support for Variant is added in Iceberg v3.

Reviewer 2: This link should be to main/master rather than a specific sha right?

Reviewer 3: This I worried about, since aren't we syncing with a specific iteration of the file?

Reviewer 4: I think linking to a specific version of the file is not very clear on what is intended.  We should be very specific in this doc what parts are intended for support in iceberg v3

Reviewer 4: To be more specific I think we should be saying only V1 of the Parquet variant spec is included (i.e. not try to address by specific link but by a specific version from parquet).

Author: Agree that eventually I think we would do that when we start to release that in Parquet. Since it's in progress right now, I will link like this and will update later.

> Variants are similar to JSON with a wider set of primitive values including date, timestamp, timestamptz, binary and floating points.

Reviewer 2: Nit: `binary, and floating points`

Variant values may contain nested types:
1. An array is an ordered collection of variant values.
2. An object is a collection of fields that are a string key and a variant value.

As a semi-structured type, there are important differences between variant and Iceberg's other types:
1. Variant arrays are similar to lists, but may contain any variant value rather than a fixed element type.
2. Variant objects are similar to structs, but may contain variable fields identified by name and field values may be any variant value rather than a fixed field type.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 2: `uuid, and fixed(L)`

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

> A **`variant`** is a type to represent semi-structured data. A variant value can store a value of any other type, including any primitive, struct, list or map values. The variant value is encoded in its own binary [encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md). Variant type is added in [v3](#version-3).

Reviewer 3: I'm generally paranoid about these things, but should we link to a specific commit in the parquet repository?

Reviewer 5: You are concerned that the link in master may break? Make sense. Let me update that.

Reviewer 5: Updated. Currently I'm linking to the commit which merges the spec. We can update to a released Parquet branch later.

> A **`variant`** is a type to represent semi-structured data. A variant value can store a value of any other type, including any primitive, struct, list or map values. The variant value is encoded in its own binary [encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md). Variant type is added in [v3](#version-3).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **`variant`** is a type to represent semi-structured data. A variant value can store a value of any other type, including any primitive, struct, list or map value. The variant encoding is defined in the [Apache Parquet Project](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md). Variant type is added in [v3](#version-3).
```

Author: Updated.

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

#### Semi-structured Types

> A **`variant`** is a value that stores semi-structured data. The structure and data types in a variant are not necessarily consistent across rows in a table or data file. The variant type and binary encoding are defined in the [Parquet project](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md), with support currently available for V1. Support for Variant is added in Iceberg v3.

Reviewer 6: > ...with support currently available for V1. Support for Variant is added in Iceberg v3.

Does that mean Parquet spec V1?

A **`map`** is a collection of key-value pairs with a key type and a value type. Both the key field and value field each have an integer id that is unique in the table schema. Map keys are required and map values can be either optional or required. Both map keys and map values may be any type, including nested types.

#### Semi-structured Types

> A **`variant`** is a value that stores semi-structured data. The structure and data types in a variant are not necessarily consistent across rows in a table or data file. The variant type and binary encoding are defined in the [Parquet project](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantEncoding.md). Support for Variant is added in Iceberg v3.

Reviewer 7: From the linked document

> Important
> 
> This specification is still under active development, and has not been formally adopted.

assuming Parquet-level spec if subject to change, what are the conditions to release Iceberg 3 with variant support in the spec?

Secondly, the linked document talks about shredding.
How does this interact with Iceberg field IDs in the parquet metadata?
Do all the columns share field ID, or is only the first column supposed to be annotated with the field ID?
Let's make it explicit.

Author: From previous discussion, the community is interested in both basic Variant type support and shredding for better performance. I can see basic variant encoding is settled - we could add additional types; I think we need finalize the shredding spec so the encoding doesn't change.

Regarding shredding, are you referring to shredded subcolumns from a Variant? I'm thinking that we can clarify in shredding spec (probably after https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/461/files#diff-95f43ac21fdadae78c95da23444ed7a4036a4993e9faa2ee5d8b2c29ef6d8056). The top variant column has the field ID and the subcolumns are accessed through the path like `location.lattitude`.  
 
> Secondly, the linked document talks about shredding.
> How does this interact with Iceberg field IDs in the parquet metadata?
> Do all the columns share field ID, or is only the first column supposed to be annotated with the field ID?
> Let's make it explicit.

> Variants are similar to JSON with a wider set of primitive values including date, timestamp, timestamptz, binary, and floating points.

Reviewer 7: if this documents the difference from json, let's skip floats and add decimals
if this documents all types variant supports, let's add integers, decimals, string

Variant values may contain nested types:
1. An array is an ordered collection of variant values.
2. An object is a collection of fields that are a string key and a variant value.

As a semi-structured type, there are important differences between variant and Iceberg's other types:
1. Variant arrays are similar to lists, but may contain any variant value rather than a fixed element type.
2. Variant objects are similar to structs, but may contain variable fields identified by name and field values may be any variant value rather than a fixed field type.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 4: yes, mostly 464.  Is there a reason not to support fixed(L)?  I suppose it is redundant with string?

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Author: Yes. We can use string instead. Also, we need to think of how to represent fixed(L) of length L if we want to support it. We need to encode L in the type if we don't lose such information while our type field only has 5 bits.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 4: I think for Fixed(L) using the same representation of String works (there can be multiple L encoded in a variant), so `size == L` this should give enough flexibility (so the type would just be "Fixed") I suppose one could get more complex then this but I'm not sure there is value given how things are currently modelled.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 4: > I'm assuming that for regular fixed(L) data type, when we insert a string, then it will truncate to length L if it's too long.

Yes, i think this might be a different assumptions. My assumption is that engines pass in valid `Fixed(L)` (i.e. length of this type are always exactly L).  Their would be  no truncation should happen at the storage layer.

So the encoding would be `<value header fixed><L as int32 (maybe int16 is sufficient)><string value>`

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Author: Yeah. I think that works.  Even with truncation, that should happen on the engine side. 

We can consider adding that to the spec if there is a need.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 3: @aihuaxu Can we fix this now? Let's probably just redo the link to the Parquet repo as well to be generic for the time being. We can assume that V1 of the Variant format will live at the same link address

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Author: @RussellSpitzer  Updated the link to point to the master branch now.

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Reviewer 3: You also no longer need

```3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.``` Since you added all of those

> 3. Variant primitives are narrower than Iceberg's primitive types: time, timestamp_ns, timestamptz_ns, uuid, and fixed(L) are not supported.

Author: You are right. I haven't added fixed(L) yet. Thought we can't support it. 

I remove this line and will update the spec to add fixed(L) type.

| **`year`**        | Extract a date or timestamp year, as years from 1970         | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                                                        | `int`       |
| **`month`**       | Extract a date or timestamp month, as months from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                                                        | `int`       |
| **`day`**         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01     | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                                                        | `int`       |
| **`hour`**        | Extract a timestamp hour, as hours from 1970-01-01 00:00:00  | `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                                                                | `int`       |

> | **`void`**        | Always produces `null`                                       | Any                                                                                                                                         | Source type or `int` |

Reviewer 2: Let's revert the whitespace changes, please. It makes these tables hard to maintain and less readable.

A data or delete file is associated with a sort order by the sort order's id within [a manifest](#manifests). Therefore, the table must declare all the sort orders for lookup. A table could also be configured with a default sort order id, indicating how the new data should be sorted by default. Writers should use this default sort order to sort the data on write, but are not required to if the default order is prohibitively expensive, as it would be for streaming writes.

Note:

> 1. `variant` columns are not valid for sorting.

Reviewer: I thought whether a variant is orderable is determined by engines per pervious discussion. Are we explicitly saying that all variants are not orderable?

Author: @flyrain Yeah. The engines can support ordering actually. Here basically we will not define the sorting order. I'm wondering if we should define one in the future. 

So I will update to  "The ability to sort variant columns and the specific sort order is determined by the engines."

Reviewer 2: We are only saying that Variant values cannot be present in an Iceberg sort order. Engines can sort if they choose.

We could also define a sort order if we wanted, but this seems like a good place to start.

Author: Do we need to explicitly say "Variant values cannot be present in an Iceberg sort order. " in the spec?

Reviewer 3: I think we should specifically write that. Don't we do so for Maps and Arrays?

Author: I don't see we call out anything for Maps and Arrays in sorting section. But the code has the check to error out with "Cannot sort by non-primitive source field". 

I don't add explicitly for Variant (just like Maps and Arrays) either but let me know if that makes sense .

> 1. The ability to sort `variant` columns and the specific sort order is determined by the engines.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this? I think anything we don't specify is up to engines already.

Author: OK. I will remove that then. Do we need to call out "Variant values cannot be present in an Iceberg sort order"?

Reviewer 3: I think we should specifically forbid sort orders containing a variant. I think we actually are underdetermined in the spec here.

We have the following checks in the Reference Implementation
https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/8a16a417492eb6ccb1895b4b6db3536ff2a8b67d/api/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/SortOrder.java#L301-L311

So currently, even though we don't specify this here, you cannot make a sort order with array or map. I think we should explicitly call this out and add variant as well. My real concern here is that we add the ability to sort on something but don't define what that sorting actually looks like.

| Transform name    | Description                                                  | Source types                                                                                              | Result type |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|

> | **`identity`**    | Source value, unmodified                                     | Any other than `variant`                                                                                  | Source type |

Reviewer 2: What out "except for"? I think that is more clear than "other than"

Reviewer 2: Should we also fix the `bucket` function definition by using an `except for` list?

Author: Make sense. Let me fix in the following PR.
> Should we also fix the `bucket` function definition by using an `except for` list?

| **`string`**         | `binary`                                                           | `UTF8`                                | Encoding must be UTF-8.                                        |
| **`uuid`**           | `fixed_len_byte_array[16]`                                         | `UUID`                                |                                                                |
| **`fixed(L)`**       | `fixed_len_byte_array[L]`                                          |                                       |                                                                |
| **`binary`**         | `binary`                                                           |                                       |                                                                |
| **`struct`**         | `group`                                                            |                                       |                                                                |
| **`list`**           | `3-level list`                                                     | `LIST`                                | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |

> | **`map`**            | `3-level map`                                                      | `MAP`                                 | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |

Reviewer 2: Looks like changes here could be reverted as well.

> | **`variant`**        | `group` with `Data` and `Metadata` fields of `binary` type         |                                       | See Parquet docs for Variant encoding.                         |

Reviewer 2: This is inaccurate: the field names are case sensitive and one is named `value` not `data`.

I think this should link to the Parquet docs, one for shredded and one for non-shredded values. The physical type should be:
> `group` of `metadata` and `value` fields

The logical type should be `VARIANT` (See https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/460).

|**`struct`**|`record`||
|**`list`**|`array`||
|**`map`**|`array` of key-value records, or `map` when keys are strings (optional).|Array storage must use logical type name `map` and must store elements that are 2-field records. The first field is a non-null key and the second field is the value.|

> |**`variant`**|`record with `metadata` and `value` fields`|Shredding is not supported in Avro.|

Reviewer 3: Sorry if this was requested somewhere else, but i'd keep any mention of "shredding" out till we add it in another pr

> |**`variant`**|`record with `metadata` and `value` fields`|Shredding is not supported in Avro.|

Reviewer 2: We should probably mention that `metadata` and `value` must not be assigned field IDs.

4. UUIDs are encoded using big endian. The test UUID for the example above is: `f79c3e09-677c-4bbd-a479-3f349cb785e7`. This UUID encoded as a byte array is:
`F7 9C 3E 09 67 7C 4B BD A4 79 3F 34 9C B7 85 E7`
5. `doubleToLongBits` must give the IEEE 754 compliant bit representation of the double value. All `NaN` bit patterns must be canonicalized to `0x7ff8000000000000L`. Negative zero (`-0.0`) must be canonicalized to positive zero (`0.0`). Float hash values are the result of hashing the float cast to double to ensure that schema evolution does not change hash values if float types are promoted.

> 6. `variant` values are currently not valid for bucketing and so they are not hashed.

Reviewer 2: I don't think Notes is a good place for this. Can you start a new paragraph about unhashed types?

> A 32-bit hash is not defined for `variant` because there are multiple representations for equivalent values.

> |---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer 2: Please revert the table changes here.

|**`struct`**|`record`||
|**`list`**|`array`||
|**`map`**|`array` of key-value records, or `map` when keys are strings (optional).|Array storage must use logical type name `map` and must store elements that are 2-field records. The first field is a non-null key and the second field is the value.|

> |**`variant`**|`record` with `metadata` and `value` fields. `metadata` and `value` must not be assigned field IDs. |Shredding is not supported in Avro.|

Reviewer 4: we should probably be consistent here and make the note that field IDs should not be assigned to the fields across all formats?

Author: I added the same note for parquet and ORC format. I see ORC use ICEBERG_ID_ATTRIBUTE to track the fieldId but the concept seems to be similar.

| **`struct`**       | `group`                                                            |                                             |                                                                |
| **`list`**         | `3-level list`                                                     | `LIST`                                      | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |
| **`map`**          | `3-level map`                                                      | `MAP`                                       | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |

> | **`variant`**      | `group` with `metadata` and `value` fields. `metadata` and `value` must not be assigned field IDs and the fields are accessed through names.| `VARIANT`                                   | See Parquet docs for [Variant encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantEncoding.md) and [Variant shredding encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/4f208158dba80ff4bff4afaa4441d7270103dff6/VariantShreddingEncoding.md). |

Reviewer 4: If everybody else is OK with a specific hash I don't want to hold this up, but I think it would be better to link to head and specify we only support V1 of both specs?  This prevents confusion if someone goes to Parquet spec in the future and sees multiple versions.

Author: Yeah. I forgot to update this. Let me do that.

| **`struct`**       | `group`                                                            |                                             |                                                                |
| **`list`**         | `3-level list`                                                     | `LIST`                                      | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |
| **`map`**          | `3-level map`                                                      | `MAP`                                       | See Parquet docs for 3-level representation.                   |

> | **`variant`**      | `group` with `metadata` and `value` fields. `metadata` and `value` must not be assigned field IDs.| `VARIANT`                                   | See Parquet docs for Variant encoding and Variant shredding encoding. |

Reviewer 7: If these don't have field ID, how should the reader locate the contents of a variant iceberg field?
are these mapped by name?

maybe that's obvious, but let's make it explicit.

> | **`variant`**      | `group` with `metadata` and `value` fields. `metadata` and `value` must not be assigned field IDs and the fields are accessed through names.| `VARIANT`                                   | See Parquet docs for Variant encoding and Variant shredding encoding. |

Reviewer 8: It might be helpful to include a link to the documentation for easier reference. What do you think?

> See Parquet docs for [Variant encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md) and [Variant shredding encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md).

Author: Sure. There is a discussion if I need to link to the files on the main branch or a particular commit above. For now, I will link to the ones on a commit to reflect the current state.

|**`list`**|`JSON object: {`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"type": "list",`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element-id": <id int>,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element-required": <bool>`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element": <type JSON>`<br />`}`|`{`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"type": "list",`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element-id": 3,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element-required": true,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"element": "string"`<br />`}`|
|**`map`**|`JSON object: {`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"type": "map",`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"key-id": <key id int>,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"key": <type JSON>,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value-id": <val id int>,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value-required": <bool>`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value": <type JSON>`<br />`}`|`{`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"type": "map",`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"key-id": 4,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"key": "string",`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value-id": 5,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value-required": false,`<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;`"value": "double"`<br />`}`|

> | **`variant`**| `JSON string: "variant"`|`"variant"`|

Reviewer 3: This should link to a well defined json translation of the Variant type which I think should live in the parquet spec.

Author: As I understand here, this is to provide the json string of the Iceberg type. It should be just showing "variant" for variant type, similar to primitive types? Let me know if I misunderstand how this part is getting used.

Reviewer 3: ah got it, forgot what was in here because of all the &nbsp junk

| **`string`**         | UTF-8 bytes (without length)                                                                                 |
| **`uuid`**           | 16-byte big-endian value, see example in Appendix B                                                          |
| **`fixed(L)`**       | Binary value                                                                                                 |
| **`binary`**         | Binary value (without length)                                                                                |
| **`decimal(P, S)`**  | Stores unscaled value as two’s-complement big-endian binary, using the minimum number of bytes for the value |
| **`struct`**         | Not supported                                                                                                |
| **`list`**           | Not supported                                                                                                |
| **`map`**            | Not supported                                                                                                |

> | **`variant`**        | Not supported                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: @RussellSpitzer, didn't we want to say that this should be a Variant `value` that contains a Variant of a value for each shredded column? I don't want to miss this in v3 or else we won't be able to do file skipping.

Reviewer 2: We will need to specify how to handle the `metadata` (concat?)

Reviewer 3: Yes I agree, but currently we don't have any info about shredding so I didn't want to include it yet

| **`list`**           | **`JSON array of values`**                                   | `[1, 2, 3]`                                | Stores a JSON array of values that are serialized using this JSON single-value format                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| **`map`**            | **`JSON object of key and value arrays`**                    | `{ "keys": ["a", "b"], "values": [1, 2] }` | Stores arrays of keys and values; individual keys and values are serialized using this JSON single-value format                                                                                                                                                                                          |

> | **`variant`**        | **`Same JSON representation in this table for stored type`** | `null`, `true`, `{"1": 1, "2": "bar"}`      | The JSON representation matches the format shown in this table for the type stored in the Variant.                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer 2: I think this is insufficient because it loses type information. For example, if there is a Variant that contains a timestamp, the timestamp's type is lost. This also appears to use the struct representation for an object, but a Variant has no field IDs.

I think that we probably do want to use a JSON representation, but we will need to make sure that it aligns with the JSON conversion defined in the Variant spec (https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/461/files#diff-80a56bf0d841087ab5038020e4b78119d6ceb44684719ba4d3a6e22effb36eb9R459) and that we have defined requirements for recovering the types.

Note that the JSON conversion in the Variant spec differs from this section:
* Binary values are hexadecimal strings here (:facepalm:) and base64 in Variant
* Decimal values are strings here and numbers in Variant

We may want to not allow Variant in JSON because of the type loss. Or we may want to specify a subset that can be recovered, like booleans, integers, floats, strings, and arrays. There are two places where this section is used: in the REST protocol for sending lower/upper bounds and in default values. We don't really need default values for variants (but would have to disallow them) and lower/upper bounds would generally work with a subset.

The other option is to encode `variant` as a base64 binary value. That is a bit ugly in JSON, but it is not lossy.

Author: I don't exactly understand how this gets used. I will make changes to say "The JSON representation with the encoding defined in the https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/461/files#diff-80a56bf0d841087ab5038020e4b78119d6ceb44684719ba4d3a6e22effb36eb9R459 of Variant spec". Would that work for lower/upper bounds usage? 

I notice that SingleValueParser.fromJson(Type type, JsonNode defaultValue) and toJson(Type type, Object defaultValue, JsonGenerator generator) would error out for Variant. Is that sufficient to disallow defaultValue?

## Appendix E: Format version changes

### Version 3

> New type `variant` is added in V3.

Reviewer 3: I would just add this to the "Types `timestamp_ns` and ....` Line

| **`struct`**                 | Not supported                                                                                                |
| **`list`**                   | Not supported                                                                                                |
| **`map`**                    | Not supported                                                                                                |

> | **`variant`**                | Not supported                                                                                                |

Reviewer 3: I do agree this should be not-supported for now. Then when shredding is included say something like for Shredded variants only,  binary value concatenation of meatdata and value + separator byte or something. We can figure that out with the shredding addition though

Reviewer 2: If we don't include Variant here, then we don't need to include it in the JSON section either.

Author: Seems binary representation is used for lower bound and upper bound and JSON single-value serialization is used for default value. Looks like they are defined independently? But since there is no default value for Variant, i will remove from JSON section.

| **`struct`**       | **`JSON object by field ID`**             | `{"1": 1, "2": "bar"}`                     | Stores struct fields using the field ID as the JSON field name; field values are stored using this JSON single-value format |
| **`list`**         | **`JSON array of values`**                | `[1, 2, 3]`                                | Stores a JSON array of values that are serialized using this JSON single-value format |
| **`map`**          | **`JSON object of key and value arrays`** | `{ "keys": ["a", "b"], "values": [1, 2] }` | Stores arrays of keys and values; individual keys and values are serialized using this JSON single-value format |

> | **`variant`**      | **`JSON string`** | `"rO0ABXVyAANbW0JL/RkVZ2fbNwIAAHhwAAAAAnVyAAJbQqzzF/gGCFTgAgAAeHAAAAAMAQIABAdu"` | Stores base64-encoded variant value |

Reviewer 3: don't we have to explain how we combine the metadata and value here as well?

Author: We are encoding as a pair of metadata and value and that should be defined in Variant class. I just updated to explain a little bit.
